m
good evening everyone and welcome thank
you so much for tuning in tonight
my name is kate bruns and on behalf of
harvard bookstore the harvard university
division of science
and the harvard library i am so pleased
to welcome you to this evening's event
with you and anglus ashley discussing
his new book
the genome odyssey medical mysteries and
the incredible quest
to solve them in conversation tonight
with siddhartha mukherjee
tonight's lecture is part of our harvard
science book talk series
which brings the authors of recently
published science-related literature to
our cambridge community and now beyond
coming up this month we will be hosting
events with nobel prize winning
biologist paul nurse
and nobel prize-winning physicist steven
weinberg
to learn more about the science book
talks you can visit the webpage
harvard.com science or sign up for the
bookstore's email newsletter at
harvard.com
we also have a youtube page where you
can view previous talks you might have
missed
i will post links in the zoom chat for
those in just a few minutes
this evening's talk is going to conclude
with some time for your questions
if you would like to ask our speakers
anything please go to the q a chat at
the bottom of the screen
where you can submit a question we're
going to get through as many as time
allows for this evening
i would also just like to say a
tremendous thank you for your patronage
during these
strange virtual times your support makes
this author series possible
and really does ensure the future of a
landmark
independent bookstore so thank you to
our partners at harvard university
and thank you to all of you for tuning
in and showing up for our authors
indie book selling and especially for
science
and finally as you may have experienced
in virtual gatherings technical issues
may arise
and if they do i'm going to do my best
to resolve them quickly so thank you for
your patience and understanding
and now i am honored to introduce
tonight's speakers
professor of medicine and genetics and
associate dean
at stanford university you and angus
ashley is renowned for his contributions
to genomic and precision medicine on the
stanford faculty
dr ashley led the team that carried out
the first clinical interpretation of a
human genome
today he directs the clinical genome
program and the center for inherited
cardiovascular
disease at stanford hospital where
genome sequencing is routinely
used in patient diagnoses now his
award-winning work has been recognized
by the obama white house
and the national institutes of health
and has earned him the medal of honor
from the american heart association
joining him in conversation tonight is
celebrated writer
oncologist and researcher siddhartha
mukherjee
he is the author most recently of the
gene and intimate history
recognized as one of the most
influential books of 2016.
and he is the author of the emperor of
all maladies a biography of cancer
winner of the 2011 pulitzer prize for
general nonfiction
tonight they'll be discussing dr
ashley's brand new book the genome
odyssey
celebrated as quote destined to be a
landmark narrative in the canon of
modern science
of the book dr mukherjee writes dr
ashley one of the pioneers of gene
sequencing technologies
writes with authority elegance and
simplicity
to enable an in-depth understanding of
the most exciting
scientific developments of our times
every curious reader
must read this book we are so honored to
host them for this conversation tonight
so without further ado dr ashley and dr
mukherjee
the digital podium is yours
uh well hello and welcome um
welcome even and congratulations on your
book
um so much
so let's start with the um you know just
a little bit of introduction um
1990 was the official date
when the human genome project was
announced
and that brings us now to about
30 years give or take um
and that's been those have been landmark
30 years
so the the first human genome
um was sequenced at the cost of about
three or four billion dollars
um now you can sequence human genomes
not i would say the reactive parts of
the human genome the
exome um at for about i don't know a
thousand dollars
six hundred dollars seven hundred
dollars something like that um
so it's been a you know a a a kind of
moore's law
kind of shift in um in
in that uh in that moment um so we
we are also standing so 30 years
from the origin of the human genome
project and of course
i can't help but remark that we're also
standing in the midst of a pandemic
where genomics sequencing of viral
genomes sequencing of viral strains
has led to a a completely new
understanding
of infectious disease so um somehow you
know both these are kind of landmark
moments
and have really changed the way we think
about the world the way we think about
ourselves
and the way we think about our futures
but let me begin with you
personally um you and tell us what
prompted you to write this book what was
the
what was the inspiration and why did you
choose to write this book
well thanks first of all uh for for
being here for being in conversation
with me today yeah i
you know i came to science initially
because of books actually not so much
because of teachers in the end i had
great science teachers but at high
school
i was reading books by people like
richard dawkins and steve pinker and
jared diamond and those sorts of people
really were the ones that brought me
into science and so i'd always admired
that
plus as i was in medical school i really
enjoyed oliver sex and his work just
tremendous
writing and so at some level i i knew
that i
might want to try and write one day and
i certainly spend my life as a doctor
inspired by these stories of these
incredible patients who go through just
amazing things
often with rare diseases where they're
on a long medical journey and odyssey
for sometimes years going from doctor to
doctor to doctor and that's just
was a is a very inspiring thing to watch
and so part of me really just wanted to
tell that story
um but also inspired by books like yours
you know
i i also understand how much of of a
narrative
sciences and that science is really a
team sport we work together and we spend
days and days going after a problem
weeks turn to months
uh eventually the problem cracks and
moves forward and it moves forward in
interesting ways and and so my my
thought was that it might be interesting
for others to read about these
scientific narratives the excitement of
the chase
as it were but to try and bring those to
human life
with the real stories of of my patients
uh
and other patients that we came to know
so all of those things
i think together were what eventually
led me to to start but but
uh i'd say your your own writing and a
tool gawandi
were also both uh very prominent in in
the last
kind of decade of course for all of us
interested in really lucid
medical and scientific narratives and so
very
inspirational to be able to to pick
those up and just to
try in my own modest way to contribute
something small to the
to the cannon well it's it's not small
it's a it's a big book and tell tell
tell us
tell us about the um writing process for
a doctor and um
and you know i'll certainly share my
observations
but but you know you you you play
three roles really in in this book right
so
on one hand you're the author um
on the on the other hand you're a doctor
and on the third you're a scientist or a
geneticist
um so you play three roles how
you know just to contrast uh this with
uh
for instance oliver sacks um you know
oliver
who i knew uh quite well didn't have
that that third role because you know
genetics was just being born
um he would ask people he would ask his
patients questions about their
family history but the idea of of the
genome being
a a tool almost a medical tool kind of
i would call it i would describe it as a
kind of stethoscope
um into into your in into what lies
deeply inside you
um didn't exist uh he you know and so
many cases
one wonders if if if those cases would
have been solved
using that that stethoscope which was
missing
in in medicine so tell us about how you
resolve
these three um roles
um you know doctor scientist and
and and author um and tell us a little
bit about
writing the writing as a process so you
know
the book you know goes is is a
compendium of stories they're kind of
whodunits
um mysteries and and in in every case
you you use the uh
the genome as a kind of as i said as a
kind of medical
stethoscope which would not have been
available
um you know 10 or 15 years ago but is
available now
um how did you how did you go about
writing this did you write at night do
you write
when the stories came up did you
remember them
um what was the way how did you choose
these in particular
uh how did you do it yeah well no
so so many things there i mean yeah
definitely think of the genome as
a molecular stethoscope first of all and
i think it would have been amazing if
oliver had access to that okay i would
only imagine the stories he might have
told
with this tool at his fingertips as well
yeah for me i think it started very
practically like for many of us uh
when you have downtime and just a little
bit of space which in in a former world
that we can barely remember now was when
we got on planes
and so i distinctly remember the first
time when i started writing and the
stories had been
in my head for some time some patients
are they're so memorable
uh that you carry these stories around
with you uh for years
in many cases and uh you know i told
them to
to a variety of people at times
obviously uh
in an anonymous fashion so the idea of
potentially
going back to revisit with those
patients and really trying to dig into
their memories and mine
uh did it with my longtime colleague and
nurse partner in the clinic and we sort
of dug through our own memories to try
and
bring back the details and then yeah i
think with uh with the young family a
lot of writing happens either on a plane
or early in the morning
or late at night or sometimes you send
the family off
on a hike or something else and get a
get a few hours to
to just try to find time um you know i
think that the
the inspiration of the story and the
drive to write it down is where it
begins
uh of course as i've learned uh it's a
long way
between just getting the words down on
the page and trying to put them into a
form that hopefully will
will be ingestible by people and
enjoyable
uh by people as well but yeah juggling
juggling those three things is is not
easy
i think that to my current work i'm a
cardiologist and
at stanford and so my cl i have a clinic
every every week
and then three or four times a year i
also work in the critical care unit
at stanford so i you know there's plenty
of if you like there's plenty of
material for patient stories so
it's almost like one day in the life on
a coronary care unit produces
three or four human stories that that
would be worth telling and
as you mentioned in the middle of the
pandemic it's almost like those are more
acute those human stories are even
closer up and made all the more
uh extreme perhaps because often the
families are not there until the very
last minute in many cases as has been
the case over this last year
and let's talk a little bit about let's
shift gears and talk a little bit about
the human genome and
its odyssey um and
um tell us about sort of what have we
learned
in the you know the 30 years that have
passed
um or you know
[Music]
when when the human genome was sequenced
as you know it was a big event uh
announced in the white house
uh jointly by uh
by um francis collins and by uh craig
venter
the president was there and it was you
know it was considered a
a kind of a public private uh
victory although as you know um very
well
that victory was tinged by a public
private competition that went
that that that preceded it uh but in the
end
a kind of compromise was reached in
which uh the
you know the public and private um
attempts to sequence the human genome
were announced jointly and out came a
string
of three billion letters in
ac tng and
if you were a layperson you would look
at that string of letters and say
gosh you know three billion letters of a
human being's genome
what do i make of it i mean you know
it's like it's like a book in which you
a language you don't understand what has
highlight for us what has happened in
the
and take your time to answer this what
have we learned about the human genome
since the publication of that
actg list or the actg
code um of the first of the first of the
first human being
well i think that you you you lay it out
very nicely as a 30-year
odyssey of its own like the human genome
in fact and there are and i
dip into that at various points in the
book so
there's there's one story where i dip
into the origins of where the
human reference sequence came from like
the people who volunteered anonymously
to to give their dna to be mixed into a
uh into a into a little pot that would
then be
uh spat out as you said with the as
these letters it was originally going to
be
ten people uh and it turned out in the
end to be basically two
um so they and they came from buffalo in
new york and so i dig a little bit into
that
history which is as you said it's like
the early 90s and there's some
interesting little elements that i
certainly wasn't aware of that i
uncovered as a result of that and then
the pivotal moment as you said about 10
years later
3 billion 10 years 10 countries and
we have a draft sequence uh which was
just an
incredible moment but i think then
everybody thought well suddenly now
there's going to be a big change
and and in fact much of the next 10
years was really trying to
work out do a little bit more finishing
work out what it meant start to you know
the number of genes that were estimated
at the time the
genome draft sequence came out was
something like 40 000
and if you watch the literature every
few years it drops to where it currently
has set
pretty much uh stable at that twenty
thousand just under
um so we spent about ten years just
really learning about the anatomy of the
genome
and i think that the major part of this
book though is really these last ten
years which is i think when
when the genome finally became relevant
not just for science and discovery and
the fundamental nature of just knowing
the genome and understanding the letters
and
how much was made up of genes and how
much was the parts in between the genes
but but making that really relevant to
to human medical care
and so i talked about at the very
beginning of the book walking into my
colleague steve quake's office and he'd
been the fifth person in the world he
sequenced his own genome with
a technology he invented in his lab for
for about forty thousand dollars which
now as you said now you can do it for
five hundred so forty thousand sounds
like a lot but
the one before it was two hundred
thousand and it had taken months and
months and
involved many different teams so it
really was a leap forward and
and the beginning of the book is really
where when i met him and i was in his
office and he
started showing me his genome on the
screen which to me was just
mind-blowing because we were at that
time used to sending genetic tests that
had maybe three genes or maybe eight
jeans on them and it took three months
to come back and cost five thousand
dollars and here it was somebody
you know on my on campus just down from
my office like scrolling through his
whole genome and
that was just you know an incredible
moment for me and then
when we realized that he essentially had
a pretty significant
history of heart disease in his family
including his cousin's son who died
suddenly with with no known cause
that was the moment things switched from
this is a scientific
you know incredible scientific moment to
suddenly a doctor-patient thing because
it was clear that even without his
genome he needed to come to a clinic and
be
screened given all this disease in his
family
but as as i was essentially inviting him
to my clinic it became clear
that he was also about to be the first
person to walk into a clinic basically
with his genome
and that we had no idea what we were
going to do with it you know and so
that was really the revelation that led
us this is 2009
to start to work on some computer
methods to really understand the genome
in the context
of medicine thinking like if you're a gp
with 12 minutes and you know in a world
where patients have their genomes
how do you integrate that data in a way
that's useful
in a way that can be ingested in a way
that really helps personalize
the care of that patient and so that's
the the work the world we've
in this last decade the world we kind of
stepped along and i think you know
at the end of the book i end up saying
that i i think after 2009 we were all
like naive thinking well in a couple of
years everyone will have their genome
sequence that really for a moment
felt a bit like that because in the
weeks and months after we published the
first paper lots of
people with access to funds were able to
get their genome sequence then they were
calling us up and saying can you help us
can you help us
but but really what happened over the
decade it took to get to this point was
a maturing of that technology we started
to
get encyclopedias of genes together
connections between genes and diseases
we began to understand the harder parts
of the genome knew what we were getting
and what we were missing
where the errors were and so that's been
a really big
process a lot of it computational but
also the technology for sequencing has
improved
and that's taken us to the point where
really it's almost routine now for rare
disease to be sequencing
the genome at least in the u.s not not
everywhere yet but it's it's essentially
every day we're ordering
genome sequencing for rare disease and
then the other two parts of it
are when you know in rare disease this
we just had rare disease day at the end
of february you know february 28th
or 29th every year is rare disease day
and we always get a chance to remind
people that one in ten
people has a rare disease which seems
mind-blowing every time i think about it
which makes rare disease as a category
as common as diabetes
and this genome can be applied to
everyone with rare disease
but the the question then that comes up
is what about the other nine out of 10
people when is the genome relevant
for much more broadly for cancer for
cardiovascular disease but the really
the big killers of our society
and i think interestingly we're just
about at that moment now we can start to
sequence at much lower depth instead of
covering the genome 40 times
we can cover it just once or twice and
use that information
to start to integrate a score that would
help us
allow us to make a much more precise
prediction of whether someone will have
a heart attack
or to to put that together with certain
well-known genes that
can predispose towards cancer if they're
mutated
uh to give an overall sense of risk so
that we know what kind of screening
to apply and that day is just coming so
i think places like stanford and
and in boston those kind of technologies
are just becoming available really this
year
but will start to spread i think to the
rest of the world coming on
now so it's been a pretty amazing 20 or
30 years
so so as we i mean just to take a very
broad look at it we we started moving
from
um you know the great pioneer victim of
cusick and others
um uh pioneered among the first rare
disease clinics
in in the world um and
um and this was at hopkins
and of course they didn't have access to
any of these technologies this was
this was even long before the human
genome project
but now we're moving then there was a
phase in which
you could use the genome to study uh
to find rare diseases or the mutations
that cause rare diseases
and now you're using the genome to find
uh
genes and often there are hundreds there
often may even be thousand
genes gene variants that cause common
diseases
like you know a risk a higher risk
elevated risk for breast cancer
an elevated risk of ovarian cancer and
elevated risk for
um cardiac disease etc etc um
one one uh question that um
has has often occurred to me um
not as a doctor so well i i should say
as a as a humanist more than anything
else
is that as we enter this kind of new
phase of our lives
um where the genome becomes a predictor
of future disease
um what do you think that does to the
minds of people and
to um and to society in general um i'm
thinking of
of this idea of of living under the
sort of the anxious umbrella of the
genome
and and um and that anxious umbrella is
constant in other words
you know you're born and you get your
genome sequenced
and out pops a a series of diseases
common diseases um
i'll give you two breast cancer and the
risk of dying of uh
of a heart attack um that now you're
you're still a babe in the arms
um and yet yet you have the possibility
of knowing
a score as you call it um yeah of
whether you will get this disease in
your future life
um talk to us about how to manage or
navigate that world
and how you might want to navigate that
word for your own children
yeah i think it's a revelation that was
a big part of our thinking
when we started to do this because i
think at some level understanding the
genome
was some something about telling you
something about what it meant to be
human
but also something about predicting your
future and when we first were sequencing
genomes i don't think we were very good
at predicting the future
uh but actually we now have much bigger
studies on which to base our scores
and so we we now are in the position to
apply these scores in a way that's
helpful
but i think that that while there's
clearly an element of what you describe
and for some people they will find that
they have variance in their genome of
large effect they really are somewhat
deterministic of what
something really will likely happen in
their lifetime that relates to that
finding
most of these um changes that we talk
about and it can even be up to millions
now spread across the genome that get
incorporated into a score
what they do is is change the
probability they move the needle
a little bit so if you go to your gp and
talk about your risk for heart attack
they'll ask you of course about they'll
talk about cholesterol you'll have it
measured they'll measure your blood
pressure talk about diabetes your
lifestyle and all of that will get
filtered into uh
into a score which is online and
available to anyone and will come up
with a 10-year risk of a heart attack
and
you know if it's above seven percent
there'll be a lot more focus on giving a
cholesterol drug for example
the thing is that we've known for years
that for heart disease half of the half
of it is nature
half is nurtured just about about those
kind of numbers it's about 50 50.
and right now actually the score we use
in the us doesn't take any account
of the of the nature part at all it's
all it's all nurture it's all about the
environment which is
is really important because those are
the things you can change uh but if you
really want to know what your risk is
and that's the basis in which you're
making the decision
you want to use the genomic information
too so it's a little bit more like that
number becomes more
precise instead of it being five percent
with an 80
probability or probably a bit lower it's
now seven percent but with a 90
probability that's the way to think
about the impact of the genome
on these kinds of diseases it's more of
a probabilistic it moves the needle a
little bit
but that's not to say that as you say if
we start to roll out
full genome sequencing even early in
life there will be people who
have a future that is change is of their
their assessment of the future will
be changed as a result of knowing that
information and that's something
in the early days we actually included
the first person i called actually after
we realized that steve quake was going
to come to the clinic
was an ethicist tank and greely who you
may know
who's written very elegantly and
recently about crispry as a book about
that
and in the past about genome sequencing
and these kinds of questions so for
example
something we hadn't thought a lot about
in our clinic was if we do very targeted
sequencing then it's really mostly
focused on that individual
but for steve for example we were
looking across his whole genome
including at
genes that would cause potentially
breast cancer and might be relevant for
his daughter
so there are all those kind of questions
that also are relate to the family
aspect of
genetics where we share not just our
environment but we share genes with our
family members and it's
anything that we learn as a result of or
anything i learn as a result of
sequencing my genome
is relevant for my brother for my sister
for my parents for my kids
and how do you i mean just to push you a
little bit on that point
how do you negotiate that or what's you
have a sense of how you negotiate that
so
i mean it will soon come to a point of
time
when that information which is of course
extraordinarily private to you
because it's about your genome becomes
relevant to your sister
i've had this case many times in which
i've had a person who has
had a mutation in let's say the bracha
one gene and i've had to
have a conversation with them uh if it's
a woman
um um or a man
um you know do you wanna do you want to
talk to
talk about this with your daughters or
with your son
but but with the daughters is very
relevant because
obviously their risk is more immediate
the sun of course also has a risk
but that risk is passed has a risk
himself
but the risk has been then passed across
uh the next generation
um how are you negotiating this in you
know
in your clinic you're you're out to
sequence you know some gene that causes
cardiomyopathy
and kaboom you find that someone is
draco one positive
um what do you do how does one
negotiate that information yeah well the
first and most important thing we found
early on was to make sure that a genetic
counselor was part of every
every single interaction that we had and
so early on we actually
hired someone straight out of uh genetic
counselling school
who was just a perfect fit for this kind
of of position
because those are not easy conversations
to have and the whole structure of
understanding this kind of information
at scale that's then relevant throughout
the family
is is a really a different skill set
even from the one that had been
traditionally taught and now of course
every
everyone who comes out of these schools
understands
variant selection and variant curation
and understands how to deal with genome
level data but
it doesn't make the underlying question
any simpler
because what we're dealing with at the
end of the day is families and family
dynamics and in many ways
these are issues that our family
practice physicians have even
even more um experience of than
us in super sub-specialized care
my father was a gp uh and growing up i
as a little kid i used to to go on house
calls with him basically that was when i
before i ever knew i wanted to to do
science or uh
or or do um computers which is what drew
me into the data side of all this
uh i knew i wanted to be a doctor it was
partly because of going
with him on house calls and we'd go into
people's homes and there would usually
be at least two sometimes three
generations of
of people there and so i think that it's
not new to medicine
the concept that there's relevance from
one generation to the next whether it's
environmentally
transmitted or or genetically
transmitted but it does make for
for difficult conversations especially
when these things have to date being
hidden and one individual has decided to
shine a bright light in it
i think that's what's new and so we
obviously have to talk about in advance
encourage them as you did with your
patient to talk to their family members
potentially in advance
and then make a decision that you hope
is the right one for the whole family
and families that come in such diverse
shapes and sizes that
part of the joy of the medicine that we
get to do is is
interacting with these families and and
really getting to know them all
and most families find that find their
own way to make this work but it's not
it's not simple um uh
you know if you don't mind i'll i'll ask
you to read a little bit from your book
because i like
um i really like it when authors read
from their book if it's
if it's okay with you i'd like you to um
choose a passage that is interesting or
a
story or and then and then you know once
you're done with that
tell us about why that story is in the
book and and how
how you you know thought about it
yeah yeah thanks thanks for asking and
this is actually a relatively uh
uh recent decision but i think this
little this story touches on a few of
the points that we've been making in
conversation
and has some relevance for for your part
of the world as well
i'll start actually it start before i
give you the background i'll start with
the beginning of the story and then i'll
give a little background and then i'll
read a little bit more
this is from chapter river of the land
of pine trees
it was the sound it was really like an
animal sound
like a moaning and i was trying to talk
to her but there was no response
there are no words that can begin to
describe what runs through the mind of a
mother who has found her teenage
daughter blue and lifeless
lying in a pool of her own spit a few
minutes before susan graham's daughter
leilani had been a normal 13 year old
vibrant fun sporty very much like her
parents
susan's husband chris was focused on the
rising tide of personal electronics in
kids lives
and a generation growing up increasingly
sedentary
both mom and dad were active in coaching
and refereeing soccer and basketball
invested in lead by example
encouragement to be active
but there was also more direct
encouragement there was a system in the
graham household
if you want to watch tv you also run
on this particular night delaney had
been working out as usual on the
treadmill in the garage
chris was out at a meeting susan was
also supposed to be out
but her plans had changed so she was
sitting at home on the sofa
the back up to the wall next to the
garage susan heard the treadmill
whirring as usual
then she heard another sound it did not
she recalled sound entirely human
but whatever it was she was clear about
one thing it was not good
she sprinted to the garage and found
lulani collapsed unconscious on the
treadmill
guttural morning emanated from her
slowly the writhing body
susan stopped the treadmill called 9-1-1
and waited leilani was breathing
but not coming around when the
paramedics arrived she was still
unconscious
could it be drugs could it be a seizure
it wasn't immediately obvious what the
problem was
but at the hospital it soon became clear
an ultrasound of her heart revealed an
abnormally thickened heart
lilani had a life-threatening genetic
heart disease of the heart muscle called
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
and that event was not a seizure but a
cardiac arrest
so this opens the chapter and tells a
little bit about the story of lulani and
then over the course of
the next few pages we talk about the
history of the disease hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy
and it's his and the history of of
bringing people back to life using
electricity but i think the part i
wanted to read a little more of
was relating to the genome because
that's the center part of the book and
the centerpiece of our conversation
and so i'll read just another couple of
pages that relate to
how we discovered the basis of this
disease and then how we worked out in
her
case what the genetic cause was
the first clue in the hunt for the
genetic cause of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy came from an unexpected
place
next to the sweeping lush green
parklands in southeast quebec a few
miles from the american border
and about 20 miles south of the nearest
large town sherbrooke is the town of
kotikuk
the name kotikuk is of abunaki origin
meaning river of the land of pine trees
in french the area is known as pearl de
canton de last
because of its natural beauty but
kotikuk became known for something less
beguiling
the kodiku curse that took many of its
citizens early with strokes and sudden
death
in the fall of 1957 two brothers aged 39
and 41
originally from this town were admitted
to the royal victoria hospital in
montreal with strokes
both were found to have enlarged hearts
both also came under the care of peter
parray
a six foot four lung specialist known
for his gentle humorous teaching style
fascinated by the coincidence of strokes
and enlarged hearts and the two brothers
hurray became convinced there must be a
genetic explanation
so much so that he dedicated the next
few years of his life to understanding
the cause of the disease in the family
the brothers he learned were not alone
in total he studied 27 family members
asking many to come to the hospital for
clinical examinations
some of them several times in july 1961
he published his seminal paper
hereditary cardiovascular dysplasia a
form of familial cardiomyopathy
in which he described 20 living affected
black family members
as well as another 10 who had previously
died and even traced the origin of the
disease back to one particular immigrant
who came to quebec in 1650.
in fact in the four years it took him to
complete the work five family members
died suddenly if ever there were a
family waiting for the right genetic
technology to narrow down the cause of
condition
it was this one genome scale sequencing
of course was a long way off
the human genome project wouldn't get
started for decades
but the linkage mapping technology was
invented in 1980 and it could help
with this technology and a family like
the one from the pieces were in place
and the seminal work describing the
genetic underpinnings of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy
was led by husband and wife team
christine and jonathan seidman of
harvard medical school
together with bill mckenna in london
they approached the family first
characterized by dr parry
and invited them to weekend reunions
where they could learn about the
research study and comment and consent
to join
more than 100 family members signed up
for what was to become a tour de force
of genetic discovery
the linkage mapping method was
labor-intensive but extremely powerful
so powerful in fact that the cyber
laboratory estimated odds of two billion
to one
that the gene responsible was in the
identified narrow region
given strong odds that this was the
right corner of the genome in which to
look
the team started fine mapping by
sequencing the critical genes in this
area
until they found one gene the cardiac
myosin heavy chain
part of the molecular motor of the heart
that looked to be responsible
the genetic variant was found in every
single family member with the disease
the kotiku curse turned out to be one
misspelled letter in the genome
where there was supposed to be a g there
was an eight
great um and of course it makes me think
about
uh the pioneering work done by nancy
wexler
um before this where they
uh ultimately mapped the huntington's
disease gene
uh using techniques and of course
similar techniques i should say and then
ultimately found the gene responsible
for for huntington's disease which is if
i remember correctly
the first time that someone had had
had moved this was a big team but that
had moved from um you know from the
uh mr from a mysterious disease that
affected
many members of a family to the actual
uh
misspelling of the of the of the genome
itself
um i think um we should move to
questions if that's uh
if that's okay and there's some other or
that already up um if i i'll start
asking them
um and then you know we can go back and
forth a little bit but
um let me move to the questions um the
first question
is from um someone anonymous it says
can you elaborate a little bit more
about the ethical considerations
regarding the genome
um and i suspect that they want to ask
you about
some of the things that we've been
talking about you know
you know once you know you know what are
the ethical considerations
but you know let me push that point even
a little bit further
um
it is now possible to um
to biopsy to create a biopsy
a tiny fetus
and you can biopsy that fetus and you
can determine
whether even before that fetus is
implanted
um so this is called pre-implantation
genetic diagnosis
and you can you can get extraordinarily
detailed information about that fetus
or that i would say
uh that that collection of cells
that human being um before you implant
that into a womb
um can you envision
a future in which uh pre-implantation
genetic diagnosis
um for a disease like
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy that runs in
a family or perhaps even more something
more complicated like
bracha one etc um play a role in in our
society and
and what happens to a society where
where
things um things become
uh relevant to um to
uh pgd pre-implantation genetic
diagnosis
yeah i know these are really important
and big big questions and thanks to
to whoever put the question up for
asking
first of all i would say that in
relation to our early genomes and we
talk about this
in a few chapters in the book when you
first realize you have this level of
information available
you need a way of first of all just
analyzing what's there and so a lot of
our work was how do we
make computers understand and how do we
have them
spit out the information we want and
prioritize it but then in that question
of priority comes our first ethical
concern because
some people might want to know
everything and the early patients that
we had were geneticists themselves who
quite literally wanted to know
everything but
most people probably do not and so we
need we needed to create a method where
people could almost like turn
turn dials for the sorts of things that
they would want to know
for example if there was a disease that
was in hidden in their genome
for which there wasn't a treatment a lot
of people didn't want to know that and
so we had to be able to
set up our tools so that that was an
option
but if there was something that
especially if there was a fairly
straightforward
treatment that could be implemented if
they only knew they had it but we'd
otherwise cut short their life they
definitely wanted to know that
and so then trying to make decisions
about how we quantify that was hard
and so then as you talk specifically
about pgd this pre-implantation genetic
diagnosis of embryos which is
a really powerful technique and it's of
course not for everyone's very personal
decision but
for those with severe genetic disease
running in their family
combining essentially in vitro
fertilization
with the ability to do a genetic test of
the individual embryos and so the way
this
would work is that there would perhaps
be if you're lucky as many as four to
eight embryos
that would each be taken to the point of
as you said being a ball of cells and
then one
cell could safely be removed from each
of the embryos and tested
and let's say you have a disease that
causes early fatality
you you can test those individual
embryos and then only implant the
embryos that are
that do not have the condition as with
most genetic diseases there's a
probability that
it's passed on and so that's that's what
pre-implantation genetic diagnosis is
and it's it's been around for
for more than 20 years although the
technology to do single cell
sequencing is is relatively recent but
be able to amplify
dna to be able to do that test that's
been around for a little while so we've
had patients in our
in our clinic over the last decade to go
through that
um i think the other part that you're i
think referring to now is
now that we can sequence a whole genome
is somebody going to suggest that we do
that at the embryo stage and
what kind of a difficult and dangerous
world would that lead us into
if now we can have scores that predict
all sorts of things
including maybe even intelligence
whatever that means and however
anyone has decided to measure it most
people would agree that's not something
that it would be ethical to choose
embryos on the basis of
and we're at the moment of course in the
middle of a revolution in understanding
what crispr
can do for us as opposed to what it has
done for millions of years
for bacteria um and whether it would
even be possible to
either change and gene edit
uh uh particularly a particularly
deleterious mutation
in an embryo back to the regular um
non-mutated form or potentially
enhanced in some way um an embryo and
this of course has
has been greatly in the news over the
course of the last two years and even
even more so with with other books that
are
currently uh focused on on the crispr
revolution and those stories are being
revisited right now so it's it's
clearly an area where the ethicists need
to be very deeply involved and closely
uh related to everything that's
happening um a quick question before we
go on to some
some some longer questions uh richard
zub wants to know what happened to the
girl on the treadmill
well so i yeah so um i'm tempted to say
buy the book and find out
um but uh i see and seriously
um she is she's doing really well um and
um i'm actually next month uh
having the pleasure of doing a sit down
like this one
uh that sid has been generous enough to
do here tonight
with her and so if you're if you'd be
interested to hear more about her story
from her
uh she is an amazing patient advocate
uh i won't tell you any more about her
medical history although it is in the
chapters in the book
for want of uh spoiling the story for
others but
uh she she's doing great and if you'd
like to see her in person then uh
there's an event in about a month's time
and you can hear some more
now where's just just give us a little
bit about where that event is and how
how does one how does one find it yeah
so it's uh uh hosted by stanford health
library
uh and so okay there is actually now
uh yeah so you can go to stanford's
google stanford health library or if you
go
to if you can type my name there's a
website now connected to
my name you and ashley.com that has a
list of the events on there
great um douglas peck um has been
waiting patiently he wants to know great
book by the way
one of the things that impressed me was
how collegial and cooperative other
scientists were in working together on
projects this is so unlike other
technology areas do you think this
that's true and if so why
so many companies struggle to build
teams and the ones that you describe
seem to work so well together even
when virtual is that is that true
or is that is that made up no it's it's
definitely not made up and i'm so
grateful for the question
um because actually that was one of the
things that really inspired me to try to
write this down i would sit in these
rooms with these just unbelievably
talented and smart people and kind of i
mean inside me i'm i'm
the guy who grew up in the west of
scotland who you know still can't quite
believe
that he's here and i'm not quite
believing that i'm in the room and i
look around and there's just these these
giant
minds that are coming together with this
very collaborative spirit
and that's not to say i'm not completely
naive about the world there's plenty of
competition out there and there's plenty
of times when people aren't
always acting in good faith but i feel
i've been really lucky and the people
i've been able to work with and when i
look around i see mostly that i see
mostly people
just bringing very high energy to an
idea and and working together with other
people
uh and maybe it's the sunshine on the
west coast or something
i know that it's it's also the case in
other parts of the world but
uh um i i really appreciate the question
because i really
feel so excited to be in those teams and
to be able to describe them
and i think that i think it really is
like that most of the time it really is
um so a little a technical question but
maybe you can you can unpack the words
for us a little bit as you
as you answer it um rossfeldberg wants
to know can you comment on the
proportion
uh um of single gene
polymorphisms with strong effects versus
multiple gene forms each with weak
effect
and can we actually detect the latter um
yeah that's a great question and
actually it mirrors very nicely the
conversation that we've been having
where the world of whole genome genetics
has moved from being focused entirely on
rare disease and rare diseases are
almost exclusively caused by variants of
small variants of of large effects
sometimes they're big variants but
in general they're of large effect and
and so rare diseases
almost by definition are relate to that
but we all have
and usually it's a few million when we
sequence the genome we end up with three
and a half million something like that
single
nucleotide single base pair or single
letter changes
uh most of which are of pretty small
effect uh and we've really just learned
over the course of the last few years
that the answer
for that is to add them add them up and
that probably most of them have some
effect somewhere
but the effect is overall very small and
i think that overall our studies
have not been large enough until quite
recently to get our arms around those
multiple variants of small effect we
were looking at let's say the
top 50 of those variants and thinking
that's that's what we have and we didn't
we didn't want to get it wrong so we
didn't really go much beyond that but
some interesting techniques um for a few
different places including a couple of
great groups out
of boston have really looked at
so-called genome-wide
scores so really looking at taking you
know five million variants each of which
has a
most of which have a very small
weighting very small weaving but a small
number of which have a larger weighting
but but taking the weightings of all of
those together really does push up just
to put it in real context
that score sometimes called polygenic
risk score is individually more powerful
than
any individual risk factor for heart
disease so it's more powerful than
asking you whether you smoke
more powerful than knowing your
cholesterol more powerful in knowing if
you're diabetic individually those
scores are not good enough that they
individually outperform those individual
risk factors
of course if you add all of them up
together you get the best possible
uh prediction and so that's what
increasingly we're doing and that's
we're rolling that out to stanford
there's a clinic at mgh doing that now
as well
and i think that really is the future of
bringing the nature and nurture aspects
of disease together into the best
predictor
so that we can make the best preventive
care and
uh let's pause for a second there
because
as we get more and more refined in
defining these
polygenic risk scores which of course i
work
a little bit about with in in in the
context of cancer
um you know you're you're having to make
difficult decisions
how how much how much of it is
reversible do you think i mean so
just just talk about cardiac disease can
we
um if you get a real polygenic risk
score that shows you
that you have a very high risk of
cardiac disease can we do anything about
it
well traditionally the thought has been
that because it's genetic and you can't
change your genome
you're kind of stuck with that part but
the first thing to say is that
as a cardiologist everybody you know i
tell every patient they should be
exercising more and eating better and
that goes for pretty much everyone in
the world that's that you can you can
say that before the patient even opens
their mouth and i say that to myself
every morning as well so um one of the
things that that was demonstrated though
is that genetic risk
can be reduced through good diet
exercise
through lowering the other risk factors
by itself of course we'd have to be
talking about crispr and base editing
gene dancing
in in order to change the genome and
that is increasingly the case i don't
think we're
even remotely close to thinking about
changing thousands or hundreds of spots
in the genome we're thinking about
trying to change
one then that's a big lift um but
the good news is that even if your
genetic risk is high
environmental intervention changing your
lifestyle
can reduce it significantly that part is
clear so it's it's definitely malleable
and that's the inspiration i think for
anyone out there who's
thinking that it might be a bit
fatalistic to measure this genome
uh prediction and that you can't change
it but you really can
so in fact in in the netherlands they
have some interesting work showing that
if you just tell people that they have
high cholesterol and that they should
exercise more
they do it at a certain rate but if you
explain to them through
that their genome has made them
predisposed towards a heart attack and
therefore they should exercise more
they actually exercise at a higher rate
so
whether that's a certain amount we
sometimes call that genetic
exceptionalism people
treat the genetic information
differently but in reality of course
your cholesterol and your
genome probably shouldn't be treated
differently but it turns out people
really do
view it differently and often are more
adept at changing their lifestyle in
response to genetic information than
just
just other environmental information
um someone asks um are there any cases
you detail in the book that are
particularly stuck with you obviously
don't give up the
they don't don't give out spoilers but
um but
uh but is there is there is there a case
that
that particularly stuck with you don't
yeah tell us something yeah
tell us as much as you wanted him yeah
yeah
i mean i i think oh in many ways i i um
it's hard to choose because i obviously
i had to choose for the book i couldn't
you know i would have written another
two books the size with all the stories
i wanted to put in so that there was
already a little bit of a filtering but
you know one of the stories that that
really uh
is emblematic of almost everything in
the book is found in the in the middle
uh somewhere in the middle and it
relates to a little baby who first came
to our attention
when she was still in her mother's womb
and her heart rate was too low
70 beats per minute and she'd be about
140 if you're swimming about
in your mother's womb so we transferred
her to stanford children's hospital
hospital and delivered her by cesarean
section and
uh within the first day of her life the
first 24 hours of her life she had five
cardiac arrests so her heart stopped
five times and it turned out she had a
genetic condition called long
qt syndrome so that's a condition the
history of which i describe in the book
but where
basically the resetting of the heart
with each beat is prolonged and so the
next beat can't come in in time
and neither of those two things matter
much but it predisposes to this
potentially fatal rhythm and so
her case really really stuck with me for
the obvious reason that there was just
this little one who was only 37 weeks of
age including her gestation and she'd
had five cardiac arrests she became one
of the youngest babies ever to have a
defibrillator an electrical device and
which was implanted in adults it goes
under the collarbone
in in babies it goes into the abdomen
and she had that implanted
at day two i think and then we realized
though that
if we could understand the genetic basis
of her disease we could give her a
precision therapy because there's at
least two forms of this condition one
where potassium channels are affected
one where sodium channels are affected
and if you know which one
you can give the right treatment but we
didn't and the and the only way to find
that out was to send a test that took
three months
so we worked with illumina the company
that does sequencing and adopted their
rapid protocol to get the answer
in two or three days and manage to make
her therapy
more precise just over the course of a
weekend basically and so
that sort of story uh for me and she's
doing great now by the way i saw a
beautiful photo of her on her
five-year-old
birthday just as i was fact checking the
the book in the last stage i
got in touch with her mom and she sent
me this amazing photo for blowing out
the candles on her birthday cake
and so in so many ways that is
emblematic of the stories in the book
because it
it's a patient in need it's technology
at the cutting edge it's
groups from industry and academia coming
together everyone just doing everything
they can for this little one from
pediatrics from genetics from all over
stanford from
multiple companies coming together and
being able in the end to give
information to the bedside team that
could
make her therapy more precise but what
we're calling precision medicine now
so that's one of the stories i often
think about as being kind of
representative of
the sorts of stories in the book um i'm
going to take the last two questions and
actually combine them
um and because they're very similar uh
one is from dhamma anti-gupta and uh
someone anonymous
um they're interested in computational
and computational genetics
um we talked about polygenic risk scores
um and one thing that has struck me
as as very interesting is that the
polygenic risk scores are additive
so in the sense that you know they have
small weights
and you you add them up and when you add
them up
um you you know you get a score
but as we explore deeper computational
methods
um it might turn out that there are
non-additive
factors uh synergistic factors
um where you know it's not a plus
p but it's a multiplied by b
that will give us even deeper
understanding into
the genome and of course we enter the
arena
of ai where um
or machine learning where we can use
even more complex methods
to disaggregate this information
um tell us a little bit about sort of
what computational
what new computational things are
happening to
uh to help us understand the genome at
an even deeper level
yeah it's a great point and i think that
i mean we you talked to the beginning
about moore's law this idea that
technology moves so fast that
every 18 months the number of
transistors on an integrated circuit
doubles that was the
the idea from silicon valley in the 90s
and 2000s of just how fast technology
was
moving and we applied it to the genome
and found the genome sequence saying the
cost was
dropping even faster than that and so
computation and
genetics have been really tied together
since since the onset of the genome in a
way that they weren't
in the decades before as you described
in going through
the amazing history of genetics in your
in your book
um but yeah for this last decade
computation and genetics have been
inseparable and
in fact many of our genetic students now
who come to stanford for their phd are
they come because they want to do
computational genetics so
absolutely there's some very interesting
approaches of artificial intelligence of
course
you don't need to go to deep neural
networks to be able to get a major boost
in our ability to work out what's
happening with a given genome
uh through computer methods but it's
actually even more than that i think the
combination of newer technologies
improvements in our sequencing
technologies
and then improvements in in our
algorithms the computer methods
not just in speed but in accuracy our
ability to really characterize the
difficult areas of the genome both by
sequencing in different ways
uh and also having computer methods i
sometimes tell the story about the
a high schooler who's now i think he
is about to graduate from stanford but
at the time he came as a high schooler
to my lab and and were part of the
undiagnosed diseases network that's part
of
the medical mysteries that are through
the book um come
from this network of doctor detectives
and uh
he basically downloaded a new algorithm
basically pulled down a new algorithm
edited it
somewhat and then tooled all the
unsolved cases so this is high school
kid
in the summer and he solved one of the
cases
this is a family that had been spent
months and even years with no answers
and now with the ability to think about
computers
manipulate computers someone who is very
very talented but
in high school can come along and solve
a miracle mystery
and i think that's just part of the
excitement that i tried to put across
in the book that you it's an incredible
time to be going into genetics
incredible time to combine engineering
skills like computer science
with biology skills and just i think a
really exciting time for
for young people to think about this as
a as a potential career
great uh we are on the hour um
and uh there are no more questions um
you know i i was totally intrigued by
the book i
i loved every story in it i was you know
i'm a big fan
of uh of the of case histories um
i i wrote a piece about we were just
talking about oliver sacks and
and how um you know um
how he was a great fan of cases trees
and what's amazing about these case
histories often
um if you look at them from victorian
times or
um or even before is that
some of them have have now years later
decades later
were finding answers to these case
histories back then there were
case histories and described as you know
medical mysteries that we never
understood
a family that had you know sudden loss
of hearing
um and all of a sudden you know 50 years
later 100 years later
you figure out that that family has a
mutation in a particular gene
um we we now we you know we you remember
uh the the history of hemophilia in the
royal family
and and how deeply it influenced uh
uh human history um and so
um i just wanted to send you know
i enjoyed the book i thought it was uh
riveting to read and uh
wanted to send you a word of
congratulations and encourage
people to to to to read this book um
which you um hopefully will buy from an
independent bookstore but if not
i'm sure you can get your get your hands
uh
on the book through other sources uh any
last words erin
well just a word of thanks to you i mean
i i think your writing is has been just
such an inspiration to me
and i think uh you know that the emperor
of all maladies was it was a masterpiece
and obviously i
really was excited when you wrote about
the history of genetics and so
if anyone uh hasn't read siddhartha's
books then they'd need to go out and
get hold of those because i was actually
a little embarrassed because all the
books from my
from my teenage years are here but i
read yours all on my kindle so yeah
how to put them on the back here but
a huge fan are really grateful to you
for for the chat this evening hopefully
my my pleasure mike thanks my pleasure
kate the floor is yours well i'll just
wrap things up thank you tremendously
you and
sid for this fascinating discussion um
and thank you all of you out there for
joining us
tonight if you would like to learn more
copies of the genome odyssey are for
sale on harvard.com as well are sids
books
um so on behalf of harvard bookstore the
harvard division of science
and the harvard library have a good
night keep reading and please be well
everyone
thank you thank you very much